Missing WHERE clause (full scan)
Locking / blocking (other queries holding tables)
Query errors (ambiguous columns, missing GROUP BY)
String operations (LIKE '%...%' — the classic non-sargable pattern)
Sorting on non-indexed columns (ORDER BY date/string vs int)
Missing indexes
Bad joins (cross joins, missing ON, too many joins)

These are literally the 7 most common categories any SQL performance tool needs to detect. You scoped the MVP for me without realizing it.


The big-picture plan (just so you see where we're going):

Week 1 — Collect real queries, build a basic Python parser that detects simple patterns (SELECT *, missing WHERE clauses, obvious index issues)
Week 2 — Read execution plans (XML format) and extract structured info
Week 3 — Build the "explainer" — translate technical problems into human language
Week 4 — Simple CLI, Dockerfile, README, clean GitHub repo → this is already a portfolio-grade MVP

Bonus observation — the "ambiguous column" example:
That's actually not a performance issue, it's a correctness issue (query fails). This is interesting — it tells me the tool could have two modes:

"Why is this slow?" (performance)
"Why is this failing?" (correctness / errors)

We'll come back to that. For now, performance is the focus.


Step 1:
Open a text file called slow_queries.sql and write down 5 queries you remember being slow (or made-up ones if you don't have access). For each one, add a comment with:

Roughly how long it took
Your suspicion about why it was slow (if any)


Step 2:
Next time you sit down, we'll build the simplest possible version of the tool:
A Python script called explain.py that:

Takes a SQL query as input (just a string)
Detects the simplest, most obvious patterns from your list:

SELECT * → warn
No WHERE clause on big tables → warn
LIKE '%...%' (leading wildcard) → warn
No LIMIT/TOP on ordered queries → warn


Prints a human-readable explanation

No database connection yet. No execution plans yet. Just text analysis. We'll start there because:

You'll have a working tool in 30 minutes
It already does something useful
It builds your confidence to keep going

Example of what tomorrow's tool will output:
$ python explain.py "SELECT * FROM Call_Log ORDER BY 1 DESC"

⚠️  Found 2 potential issues:

1. SELECT * — returns all columns
   → Consider listing only the columns you need.
     This reduces data transfer and can enable index-only scans.

2. No WHERE clause on ORDER BY
   → Sorting the entire table is expensive.
     Add a WHERE filter or TOP/LIMIT clause.
